# Math Anxiety, Mind Wandering, and Learning

Author: Emi Cervantes

The project focuses on the effect of worked examples in mitigating math anxiety in elementary school students learning math. The data comes from the experimental study in 2021 that looked at the effects of work examples on students' math education and engagement during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Study: https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2023-75203-001

# Study 1: Effectiveness of Worked Examples on Reducing Math Anxiety

Cognitive Load Theory (Sweller, 2011) suggests that worked examples, mathematical problems with written out solutions, can increase students’ available working memory resources - which are a limited set of cognitive attention resources that allow students to learn mathematics concepts and solve word problems. Worked examples may offload attention to written word problem solutions rather than requiring learners to hold them in mind, creating more efficient learning. At the same time, many students feel mathematical anxiety when faced with mathematics learning and problem solving, which can generate worries that engage the same limited set of working memory resources, reducing available resources for new learning and problem solving. To test whether worked examples could mitigate the deleterious effects of mathematical anxiety on performance, a pre-post design experiment was conducted on 280 fifth-graders from ten schools in Orange County and Chicago to see whether worked examples could reduce mathematical anxiety in students learning ratios - a challenging mathematical concept. The study also examined other potential relationships with mathematical anxiety such as mind wandering and situational interest. A multiple linear regression model was used to assess the relationships between these key features. Findings indicate that for those who were given worked examples during instruction, their mathematical anxiety was mitigated which allowed them to perform more accurately in the delayed assessment. Mathematical anxiety was a significant predictor of mind wandering, which is a factor in predicting students’ performance as well. 

# Study 2: Gender Disparities in Math Anxiety, Mind Wandering, and Learning: An Analytical Study and Educational Implications

Previous research has suggested math anxiety, a genuine worry or fear about mathematical situations, might reduce math learning through increased mind wandering with a decrease in interest (Mesghina et al., 2023). Furthermore, gender gaps in math achievement continue to be a persistent issue as past studies have shown higher math anxiety among girls (Devine et al., 2012). Nevertheless, providing effective instructional tools such as worked examples in the classroom may effectively solve this issue by disrupting the complex mechanism of math anxiety. Cognitive Load Theory (Sweller, 1988) suggests such tools can increase students’ available working memory resources during problem-solving and math learning - which are a limited set of cognitive attention resources that allow students to learn mathematics concepts and solve word problems. At the same time, many students feel math anxiety when faced with math learning and problem-solving, which can generate worries that engage the same limited set of working memory resources, reducing available resources for problem-solving. We constructed a theoretical path analysis to examine the relationships between situational interests, mind wandering, trait math anxiety, and math achievement (both test scores and perceived understanding) with gender as a mediator, to data taken from a previous study by Mesghina examining the effectiveness of worked examples on math anxiety. No gender differences were found in the effect of trait math anxiety on learning achievements when worked examples were given, signifying that worked examples are effective tools in reducing math anxiety for students of all genders, and may be particularly helpful given that in the general population, trait anxiety tends to be higher in girls. However, our results suggest further precaution for potential gender differences in the impacts of mind wandering on learning outcomes. 


